Hello.
Welcome to Kernel Tracing
Made Easy with DTrace.
Today we're going to do a
short introduction to DTrace.
We're going to learn what it is.
We're going to learn a little bit
about the deprogramming language.
I'll show you a sample script,
another sample script.
We'll talk a little bit
about what works now.
We'll talk a little bit about what's
not in the WWDC Leopard seed that
you guys already have in your hands.
And we'll talk a little bit about
what's going to be different.
Anybody who attended Dave's talk
earlier this week saw this slide.
This is DTrace being used by X-Ray.
What we're going to talk
about is this part of things,
just DTrace by itself.
So what is DTrace?
DTrace is an open source technology
and it came out of OpenSolaris.
It was the first thing
OpenSolaris released.
The D stands for dynamic,
so it's dynamic trace.
It's usable for profiling, locating bugs,
exploring the operating system,
just figuring out what's going on.
There's no recompilation of
code necessary to use this
tracing facility on the operating
system or on your own programs.
You can trace more stuff, less stuff,
and you can drill down
on problems iteratively,
again, without changing a line of code.
There's near zero overhead
when it's not in use.
So if you don't use it,
it doesn't cost you anything.
For dynamic probes,
there's no overhead at all,
unless you're using it.
For static probes,
there's a tiny bit of overhead
which is normally eaten by the
CPU instruction pipeline because
it turns static probes into no ops,
and then replaces them with code when
you turn them on and puts them back
to no ops when you turn them off.
DTRACE is not here to
replace your debugger.
You can't modify memory.
You can't modify registers.
You can't interpose functions,
so you can't change the arguments to a
function or the results from a function.
You can't call arbitrary functions.
So if you had lock_debug in your
kernel and you wanted to run
it like you would from a and it
would print out your lock list.
You can't do that.
D itself is not a Turing
complete language.
And the simple way to explain
that is you can't write
general purpose programs in it.
But what it means to you
is there's no branching,
so you can't jump backwards
and get into an infinite loop.
There's no iteration,
so you can't blow a loop counter
and get into an infinite loop.
And there's no user functions,
so it's not possible to do
recursion and either get into
an infinite loop or crash.
But you can change the
timing a little bit.
When you do probe functions,
you actually do end up
executing code that you would
not have otherwise executed,
and this can sometimes
result in timing changes.
And you can use that to your
advantage if you want to trigger
a timing change if something only
happens when the timing is off.
The deprogramming language.
The deprogramming language
has a C-like syntax.
It's an event declarative language.
That means it's very much like awk.
I don't know if everybody's
familiar with awk.
If you're a Unix head, you are.
If you're not,
it's the weirdest thing ever.
You can indicate an interest in
an event by creating a probe.
And what happens when that
event goes is the probe fires.
And then whether or not it actually
does anything or collects any
information is based on a predicate.
So actually when you
instrument a probe point,
the probe is firing,
but you don't necessarily
have any collection of data
unless the predicate is true.
And it's basically like an if test.
So you declare the probe, you say,
"Here's the probe,
but only do it if this thing
happens." And of course the
order of the probes is important.
We can decode C, C++ data types.
Actually, Objective-C as well,
with some of the work
by the tools people.
But they don't use the
compact type format for it.
Compact type format is basically
massaged debugger information,
which gets put into a separate section,
and then is used to allow
you to know whether or not
something's a pointer or an int,
and allow you to dereference
structure members.
For example,
the contents of the proc structure.
You want to look at p_com,
which is the command that happens
to be running in that process.
You can do that.
It also supports speculative tracing.
What speculative tracing does is it
lets you collect data on everything,
and then if you decide after
you've collected the data,
no, that's not what I was interested in.
You can throw that away and only
show the data that shows the
things that you're interested in.
This is a little bit more powerful
than the windowed debugging in Shark,
in that all you get back from
it is the events of interest,
not all the events surrounding it.
So, what's a D script?
Well, if you're a Unix head,
then you'll recognize this as a
back-of-snow grammar for a D script.
But what it basically means is that
a D script is one or more clauses.
A clause consists of a probe,
a predicate, and an action.
The predicate is optional,
as you can see by the brackets.
A probe itself consists of a provider,
a colon, a module name,
which is optional, a colon,
a function name, which is optional,
colon,
and then a name for the probe itself
for the action that it's going to do.
So, for example,
entry or return on a function.
And I have a couple of examples here.
The first example right there,
we're doing a system call probe.
So, that matches system call.
It matches any module.
In our case,
the only one who implements system
call probes is the kernel itself.
That module name is mock_kernel.
And then we get the close function.
And when the close function returns,
then if self -- self is a
reference to the thread.
And if that's true,
then it sets it to false.
This is basically the probe
we use to turn off tracing on
the way out of a system call.
This second example is
function boundary tracing.
Function boundary tracing traces
entries into and out of functions.
This particular one,
we're saying match only the Mach kernel.
Actually,
you could put a KEXT name in there,
although that won't
work in the WWDC seed.
And then it doesn't care
what function it is.
All we care about is the
entry to the function.
And then, of course, just to be tidy,
I'm saying I'm not interested
in tracing things which have
to do with Dtrace itself.
So, if the executable name
is actually Dtrace,
then I'm not going to trace it.
And then what I do in my action
is -- and you'll get a little more
information on this later -- is I have
an aggregate variable like calls.
This is similar to a
Perl associative array.
It's indexed by the executable name.
And what it'll do is it'll count the
number of times that you enter into this.
So, this particular example counts the
number of function call entries.
"That happen within any given
executable over the entire time
that the probe set is running."
So let's start with the sample script.
At the top,
there's the familiar pound bang
that says this is a script.
The executable name is UserSbinDTrace.
That's the same location
as it is on OpenSolaris.
The dash S says it's a script.
So what we're going to do is
we're going to do the close
entry instead of the exit.
And when the touch program calls close,
because we use the predicate touch,
we're going to begin tracing this thread.
And the guard is a global variable which,
like basic,
you declare it and start using it.
[Transcript missing]
When the close call returns,
we unmark the thread as traced.
What this is basically going to do is
we're going to enter into the close call,
we're going to see all of the
functions which happen in the kernel
as a result of the close call,
and then we're going to
see the close call exit.
So, I have a demo.
So, demo machine please.
Demo please?
[Transcript missing]
Is this thing normally
running Leopard or not?
Do we know?
We probably don't know.
Well, that's interesting.
[Transcript missing]
The DTrace output is the trace output.
Maybe I can get Steve to come
up and boot this thing on the
Leopard on the external hard drive,
unless it's running Leopard already.
What you would have seen is
a column which indicated the
CPU that things were running on,
another column which is the probe ID,
and then you would have seen function
call entry and exit for all of
the function calls in between.
And it turns out that this is actually
not an incredibly pretty output.
So what you can do is you can actually
control the output that you get.
The output that you get is
actually varying by provider.
So you can override the default output.
In this particular case,
we were getting the function
boundary trace output,
and it was pretty ugly.
So I don't mind missing that demo.
You can override the default output.
You can either do this with your own
output in addition to the default output,
and there are a bunch of
intrinsics for doing this.
There's a trace intrinsic,
which allows you to trace
variables or data out.
There's the trace mem,
which outputs chunks of memory.
It's controllable.
There's our old friend printf.
There's printa,
which is like printf for the aggregate
variables I talked about earlier.
There's stack,
which will show you the kernel stack
at the time that the probe fires.
And there's ustack,
which shows you the user stack
at the time that the probe fires.
And some providers let you
select from alternate outputs
that they themselves support.
For example, the FBT provider has a
poundpregmedd option flow indent,
which is really more
complicated than it needs to be.
A way of saying,
"I don't want the ugly output.
I want the pretty output."
Is it back alive?
Yes.
Okay.
I'll let Steve check to see if it works.
So I'm actually going
to give another demo,
which shows actually the
call graph nesting depth.
[Transcript missing]
We'll get the demos up in a second.
Adding information to our sample script.
So, in addition to getting the
pretty call graph output,
which would have included only
the CPU ID and the function name,
as well as little arrows left
and right as to the probe depth,
which I actually would have been
able to sneakily show you if they
hadn't got rid of my folded slides.
[Transcript missing]
If it's up and happy, which it may be,
then I'll be able to give
a couple of short demos.
Does it panic when you do
a function boundary trace?
We'll see in a sec.
Looks good, okay.
So, I guess back to the demo machine.
Oh, what is it?
Shift Option +?
Yeah.
Oh, go back to demo, please.
Go back to demo.
Yay!
Okay.
This is kind of meaningless over here.
You can ignore it.
But what I'm going to do is I'm going
to trigger the sample over here.
And this is my initial sample.
So what we'll do is we'll touch,
since that's the program that's
waiting for some file in temp.
All of my files tend to be named foo.
And there.
This is the initial output
we were supposed to see.
And as you can see, it's not very pretty.
You can also see that
it does a lot of work.
So,
let's make the output a little prettier.
This is the second demo.
I'm lazy.
I'll just up arrow and do foo again.
Okay.
So now here we see our
call nesting depth.
This is the same type of thing
that you might get out of
Cflow or something like that,
some other tool.
But it gives us a good
idea of what's going on.
DTrace, an open source project which
provides insight into the interaction
between your code and the OS kernel,
is now available as part of Leopard.
This session will explain how kernel
developers can both take advantage of,
and extend,
DTrace's functionality to help
debug and optimize low-level code.
This session will explain how kernel
developers can both take advantage of,
and extend,
DTrace's functionality to help
debug and optimize low-level code.
how the nesting depth
doesn't quite line up.
The reason is because we don't
see the tail call optimization
on that particular function.
Hopefully,
we'll be able to deal with that.
But it actually doesn't
distort the output too much.
You get useful output from it.
So what we'll do is we'll go to the
pretty example with our own output.
Let's mix things up.
Phi instead of fu.
So, what do we have here?
On the right,
we have timestamps in nanoseconds
for the amount of time that it
took in each one of these calls.
These are actually one behind because of
the way that I'm calculating the deltas.
I could have tried to make it prettier,
but it's not a Turing complete language.
So, we can look through these and we
can see that out of these numbers,
the only thing that really sticks out
as a high number is this guy here.
That basically means that that
function is potentially one that
we're going to want to optimize.
Okay, podium please.
So let's talk a little
bit about probe order.
Probe order is important.
Probes are firing every time they're hit.
You can think of these
as events which occur.
And event streams always occur in order.
So what's going to happen in this,
we've switched up the order of
assist call and the FBT probes.
And we're going to see what happens.
Because this probe comes first here,
the assist call close probe,
and we see that its action
is to turn off tracing.
This probe does not fire.
And the reason this probe doesn't fire is
because its predicate is no longer true.
So you've got to be careful a little
bit about probe order if you want
to capture all of the information
that you're trying to capture.
So,
don't know if I want to go back there.
So we have another demo coming up here.
What we're going to do is we're
going to watch the amount of data
read and written by the program top.
This shows instrumentation of the
system call functions read and write,
and it shows introspection
of their arguments.
You can see I'm using another
aggregate function down in the
read entry and the write entry.
They seem identical.
What I'm really doing
is by probe function,
which in the read case is
the string quote read quote,
and in the write function
is quote write quote,
and we quantize it on
the second argument.
Arguments are option based zero,
so don't know how many people
directly use read and write.
Read and write take a file descriptor,
they take a buffer pointer,
and they take a byte count.
So what we're going to quantize
on here is argument two,
which is the third
parameter to the function,
which is the byte count.
So we're interested in the byte
count that's going to happen.
And then when we see the
system call exit get entered,
what we're going to do is we're
going to print out our information,
and we're going to exit DTrace.
So this basically captures
only the information that
you're interested in capturing.
Demo, please.
Okay,
so what we're going to do is we're going
to watch what the program top does.
So I'll start up top over here.
What it's doing really doesn't matter.
I'll switch its mode,
switch its mode back.
I'll quit it out.
And here's what we get back from it.
What we get back is power of
two histograms on the number
of bytes read and written,
and the number of times
each function is called.
So for example,
we've had three calls which were
somewhere between 1025 and 2048 bytes.
We've had seven calls down in the
165 to 128 bucket and so forth.
So we basically get a histogram on that.
So actually it's kind of not necessarily
interesting to do this because you don't
necessarily capture what's going on at
the time that you're having a problem.
So what I did was with a little
ANSI escape sequence foo on my computer,
I was using my original script and then
using what's called the profile provider,
which fires at a certain time interval.
It's user-specifiable.
I said do it once a second.
I'm going to capture just the writes.
And I'm doing this in real time.
And it's updating the graph in real time.
So you can use DTrace
to write your own tools.
And you notice when I move the pointer,
it actually moves,
so it's not eating the system either.
And when I quit top, it stops.
If I start it back up,
it picks up where it left off.
Okay.
Uh, podium.
That was our demo that we just did.
What works right now?
Right now,
we have a number of providers working.
We have the DTrace provider itself
that provides begin and an error.
That lets you set up
things before you start.
It lets you clean up things or
print out data when you're done.
And it lets you handle error conditions.
Right now,
please don't generate error conditions.
Basically, what this is intended to do is
it's intended to trap things like
null pointer dereferences if you
attempt to introspect a pointer to
a string that happens to be null,
or things like that.
Function boundary tracing,
we just demoed that.
System call tracing, we demoed that.
Timed events, we demoed that.
There's actually another
demo in the set of scripts,
which makes the timed events
a little more understandable.
But I won't show that.
You can get that at the website.
PID providers.
We have two PID providers.
We have the regular PID provider
and the tools people have added
in Objective-C PID provider.
The Objective-C changes up
the arguments a little bit for
module name and function name,
and replaces them with class and method.
And we'll be documenting that.
We've got some static user probes going,
which basically means instrumenting
your own code or instrumenting our code,
or as you maybe saw yesterday,
instrumenting Java 1.6.
We support the full probe complement
for detracing Java that Sun supports.
And then Mach calls.
That's an example of a
little bit of a demo.
And then we have a little
bit of a demo of the code.
We're going to show you
a little bit of a demo.
That's an Apple edition.
And it's basically the same
as a system call provider,
except for Mach calls,
which Solaris didn't have.
The detrace command line works,
although apparently not the first time.
The detrace library works.
So you can link your own programs
that use it against that library,
although I don't think many
people actually do that.
We don't even do that with X-Ray.
X-Ray actually invokes the command
line detrace and parses its output.
And the detrace documentation
already out there applies to
everything that we've done in detrace.
So anything you can Google on the web,
that basically applies to us.
So, what's not in the leopard
seed that you have?
What's not in the leopard
seed is some of the providers.
They're all static probes.
They're all in my bug queue.
And they're basically the static
kernel probes for gathering
information from places where it's
dangerous to gather information
with a function boundary tracing.
And so, when these events fire,
we have a different way of
collecting the information,
and because of that,
we instrument things that you can't.
And if you had something
like that in your driver,
you'd be able to use that as well.
But, like I said, right now,
for the seed,
we're not supporting static probes.
The compact type format and symbols
for tracing texts is not there.
That would include your texts.
So, right now, you can't specify your
text name as a module name,
but you will be able to specify
your text name as a module name.
Static probes in your texts,
you could use those as well
if you had dangerous places.
The PPC support is currently
lagging behind the x86 support.
That's a little explainable.
We're porting x86 code.
The PPC support is pretty much there
with the exception of the PID provider.
And then there's a number of
additional exit probes and entry
probes that were kind of scary
because there's actually a lot of
assembly language in our PPC kernel.
And the x86 support
is currently disabled.
You can actually boot your
system with a boot args,
your 64-bit system with
a boot args of -legacy.
And that'll re-enable it.
But you won't be able to run 64-bit
programs while you're doing that.
We expect to address
this in the near future.
So, what's going to be
different from Solaris?
I was going to say the other ports,
but it looks like we're
out of the gate first.
Mostly,
they're OpenSolera-specific things,
and most of them have to do with
impedance mismatches in kernel design.
I could go into detail
on each one of these,
but effectively, they have to do with the
differences in architecture.
Where possible, we're going to map to
Mac OS X equivalents.
So you should be safe from them
when running generic scripts.
You might get slightly
different information,
but we expect the probe points will work,
maybe with the exception of the UFS probe
points that they have in their code.
And you should be able to use
generic scripts which are written
on Mac OS X on non-Mac OS X systems.
"We'll be contributing to the organ
bank out there and we'll be collecting."
So, what can I use it for now
with what I get in the seed?
Well, you can find the location
of kernel memory leaks.
I won't go into that in detail,
but there is a sample script
which instruments the kernel zone
allocator and counts the number
of allocations and deallocations.
And everywhere there's a positive number,
you either have a leak or you
have a persistent allocation.
And everywhere there's a negative number,
I'm surprised you didn't crash.
You can find out where
an error is coming from.
That's kind of neat.
So you could use
speculative tracing to say,
give me the results of this,
and when this function
kicks back this error,
then I want that information.
But until then,
just keep doing it and throw
away the stuff I don't want.
You can find out where to look for
performance problems for a given
program load or a given benchmark.
My benchmark of touching the file foo
in /temp indicated that the closef
[Transcript missing]
That's a real big thing for
me because unlike texts,
I can't necessarily unload my kernel
and load a new one without rebooting.
Most places that you'd put a printf
are places where you would do
printing out of arguments or
lock state or things like that.
And obviously anything that's available
on the argument stack is available
at the time that the probe fires.
Things which aren't available
are local variables.
So you aren't going to be able to,
for example, introspect the contents
of a stack variable.
So maybe once in a while you'll
either have to put in a static probe,
which will be deactive and
not out of your shipping code,
or you'll have to put in a printf,
do it the old way.
You can also be surprised at how
much work the kernel really does.
I expected a lot of people
who come from user space,
expected it to go into close and come --
right back out without doing anything.
Instead we had maybe 40
lines of function calls,
maybe 20 functions being entered
and 20 functions -- the same
20 functions being exited.
And it's fun for just poking around.
I know Steve and a couple other people
poked around and we found out that,
for example,
our Windows server was -- I think it was
-- I think it was calling sigprocmask
an ungodly number of times a second.
And that's something
we have to look into.
So, what we're going to do is
we're going to do a bug hunt.
This is a bug hunt that
I've done personally,
and it was my first real use of DTrace,
and so I'm going to show it to you guys.
Demo, please.
[Transcript missing]
I worked on the POSIX conformance stuff,
and as part of that, we had to deal with
differences in the set UID,
set GID calls, and so on.
And we have this little
thing called Apple Directory,
which is not such a little thing,
and it provides credential information
that is not stored locally.
Well, it turns out that you pretty much
have to be able to get out of
with a particular group with set groups.
And it turns out that even
when you left the group,
you were still in the group.
Because set group would say no,
you're not in the group.
And then it would say, well,
let me ask the directory server.
Directory server says yes.
Congratulations, you're in the group.
So I had to do a bunch of
code to deal with that.
And my code to deal with
that is-- let's see.
What did I call it?
About 1900 lines of code.
So I had to deal with it in
about 1900 lines of code.
And,
like most 1900 lines of code changes,
something didn't work.
[Transcript missing]
That should have been the transition
event for the credentials were
spread all over the place.
There are a lot of files.
I can say index of three files,
three fairly large files.
And
To do this with the traditional method,
what I would have to do is I'd
have to spread printfs in every
place where potentially one
of these things was happening,
and I would have to deal with it.
So instead,
what I did was I wrote a DTrace script.
Let's see, where is it?
I wrote a little DTrace script.
My little exec name cheat here is so
that I can use a different code path.
Obviously, this kernel does not
have the bug anymore,
so I had to put it back in,
but if I put it back in,
it would have been bad,
so I had to put it in a different place.
So what I'm going to do is I'm
basically going to check the
function boundary crossings to see
what code path is there in the bug.
And I have a little file.
The DTrace: Kernel Logging Made Easy.
DTrace, an open source project which
provides insight into the interaction
between your code and the OS kernel,
is now available as part of Leopard.
This session will explain how kernel
developers can both take advantage of,
and extend,
DTrace's functionality to help
debug and optimize low-level code.
[Transcript missing]
And here's the call path.
And rather than getting into
a huge amount of explanation
on all the mandatory access
control and all that stuff,
what we'll do is we'll say, well,
This is the only thing in the
code path that I touched in
the 16 places that I touched.
So that's the one that I care about.
So what we'll do is--
What we'll do is we'll wait
until we get into that function.
That happens to be a kernel function.
That's a kernel function you wouldn't
otherwise be able to see into unless
you had sources to the kernel,
compiled up your own kernel,
put a printf in.
And what I'm going to print out is
I'm going to print out the user ID,
the effective user ID, the saved user ID,
and the group membership UID,
which is the one that
should have been changing.
Those are all the
parameters to the function.
There are arguments 1, 2, 3,
and 4 to Kauth, Cred, SetReal, Effective,
and Saved user IDs.
So we'll say ./script2.
And we'll run my special
buggy version of the code.
It wasn't an X.
What was it called?
It was called bug.
Of course, why would a bug be called bug?
Okay, and we're going to run it.
And if I quit reaching for the
clicker instead of the mouse.
We'll see that what's happening is
it's effectively opting us back in.
It's saying,
"For group membership checks,
check for UID 501 in the
Apple directory." Well,
I told it not to do that
with the set groups.
What's going on?
Obviously, the parameter is wrong.
So, how do I find that out?
Well, I can...
I can go through here and try
and find something near or
around or before or after,
or maybe not even in the diffs that
I did because I forgot something.
That's a lot to go through.
That's not interesting.
I could go into the C file itself.
I could go in the C file and look around,
but that's not a lot of work.
But I know from the DTrace that
it's that particular function.
So what I'll do is
I will go in the C file.
Kernel.proc.c.
And what we're looking for
is we're looking for chaos.
DTrace, an open source project which
provides insight into the interaction
between your code and the OS kernel,
is now available as part of Leopard.
This session will explain how kernel
developers can both take advantage of,
and extend,
DTrace's functionality to help
debug and optimize low-level code.
This session will explain how kernel
developers can both take advantage of,
and extend,
DTrace's functionality to help
debug and optimize low-level code.
Let's see,
we know it's in the setuid function.
So what we'll do is we'll go
down to chaos-cred probably.
Did I do that?
Yeah.
Yeah, CathCred.
So here's the function call.
And it turns out that what I did
was I set a group membership UID
I set it only in the case that I'm
opting out of the directory services,
in this case, memberd.
And then, well, I'll be darned.
I did all my work except
passing the right parameter.
I assume that I've
recompiled and rebooted,
but only once.
And I see from my DTrace output,
It's passing Kauth no cred,
Kauth cred no cred,
which is what it should have
been passing in the first place.
And so I fixed my bug,
and I've done it in about five minutes,
and that's about what it took me.
Podium, please.
So I pretty much, while I was talking,
went through the moral of the story.
Doing a lot of printfs and debug,
I would have been at least four
kernel recompiles and reboots out.
I would have had to put
the printfs in everywhere.
I would have had to take
them out of everywhere except
the code path of interest,
put more printfs in the
code path of interest,
and then I'd have to
recompile and reboot again,
try again.
And then I would have had to take all my
printfs out and hope that I got them all.
Instead, five minutes.
Here are the DTrace
resources on the internet.
I'm sure that Garth will make
this available somewhere.
And so,
what should you take away from this?
DTrace is neat.
I like it.
And that's not just
because I helped Steve,
who did most of the work, work on it.
You want it.
Leopard has it.
It's not hard to use.
As we saw, hopefully everybody's going to
come away from this with a basic
understanding of how to do a Descript,
or at least putter around until
they get something useful out of it.
It's going to make your life easier,
and it's going to help improve your code.